

Expected Answer
To be a covered professional provider, the provider must be a licensed professional healthcare practitioner, and the services performed must be within the scope of that practitioner's license or certification under applicable state law.
No. The policy states that the ACA provision does not require the plan to contract with any specific health care provider. It only requires that the plan does not discriminate against a provider based on their license or certification.
A Preferred Professional Provider is one who has a written agreement with the Local Plan to accept the Plan allowance for covered services as payment in full. Members receive higher benefits (Preferred benefits) when using these providers.
A Non-participating Professional Provider is a non-preferred provider who does not have a written agreement with the Local Plan to accept the Plan allowance as payment in full.
The three types are the Preferred Provider Allowance (PPA), the Participating Provider Allowance (PAR), and the Non-Participating Provider Allowance (NPA).
The member is only responsible for any applicable copayment, coinsurance, and/or deductible. The provider is not allowed to bill for any charges in excess of the PPA.
The NPA is the amount equal to the greater of: 1) The Medicare participating fee schedule amount, or 2) The 100% of the Local Plan Allowance.
The NPA is the amount that is the lesser of: 1) The billed amount, or 2) The qualifying payment amount (QPA) determined in accordance with federal laws.
Standard Option members may request prior approval and the Non-participating Provider Allowance (NPA) for non-emergency surgical services when the provider's bill for the surgery will be $5,000 or more.
An episode of care is defined as all covered non-participating professional services an individual receives during an emergency room visit, a hospital admission (including associated emergency room or preadmission services), plus their first follow-up visit to the non-participating professional(s) who performed the services.
Examples include a radiologist, anesthesiologist, certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA), pathologist, neonatologist, or pediatric sub-specialist who is recruited from outside the hospital either without the member's knowledge or because they are needed to provide immediate medical or surgical expertise.
The member may receive two bills: one from the professional provider for their services and a separate "facility claim" from the hospital or facility for the use of the space and equipment. The member is responsible for cost-sharing amounts on both claims.
Yes, the policy states that Basic Option and FEP Blue Focus benefits are available for the services of acupuncturists.
The designation drives the member's liability for the copayment. Generally, "specialists" are medical doctors (M.D.s) whose area of expertise is not included under "primary care providers." The copayment for primary care services is less than the copayment for specialist services.
The policy lists family practitioners, general practitioners, internists, pediatricians, obstetricians/gynecologists, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, physical therapists, and audiologists as examples of primary care providers.
The No Surprises Act is part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 and provides protections against surprise billing and balance billing under certain circumstances.
Exceptions include: 1) Medical emergency or accidental injury care in a hospital emergency room, 2) Professional care provided by non-preferred anesthesiologists or pathologists at a Preferred facility, and 3) Laboratory and x-ray services billed by non-preferred laboratories.
The member pays nothing for medically necessary ambulance transport services that are related to an accidental injury, provided the services are received within 72 hours of the accident.
They must use Preferred providers to receive benefits. The policy, under "Non-Preferred Professional Care," notes that for the Standard Option, members have a choice when selecting providers from whom they may seek care, but the member receives the Non-preferred benefit.
Yes, services of assistant surgeons are listed as an exception, including those assisting surgeons in a physician's office.



Expected Answer
For the Standard Option, a Preferred major specialist should be located within 30 miles of a member's residence in a suburban area.
For the Standard Option, a rural member should have access to a Preferred PCP within 30 miles of their residence. For the Basic Option, the required access distance is within 75 miles.
No, the NPA Balance Relief provision does not enable a member to continue seeing a non-participating provider for the entire episode of illness. Subsequent non-participating professional services are not eligible for NPA Balance Relief.
The member is encouraged to negotiate with the provider to reduce the charge, as the member is responsible for any balance below $5,000. The plan's liability is limited to $5,000, meaning the member is ultimately responsible for any charges that exceed this amount.
The claims processing system cannot identify and defer multiple claims from different providers for the same episode of care. The provision only applies when the balance between a single provider's charge and the NPA for an individual claim exceeds $5,000.
No, prior approval for a non-participating provider surgery is only required when the member's potential cost for the surgery is $5,000 or more.
Yes, if the Plan determines that an appropriate network provider is not available for a Basic Option member, or that circumstances beyond the member's control necessitate using a non-participating provider, the Plan may grant an exception.
The member is not responsible. In an approved special access situation with a non-participating provider, the plan pays 100% of the billed amount. The member is only responsible for their standard copayment and/or coinsurance.
No. A member is not eligible to be included in VBPs if they have other primary health coverage, such as Medicare or another employer-sponsored plan.
No. Michigan is cited as a state with a restrictive scope of practice where chiropractors are prohibited from performing services like venipuncture for diagnostic purposes or dispensing nutritional supplements.
In a state with an expansive scope like Oregon, chiropractors may perform services such as venipuncture, sign birth and death certificates, and use acupuncture. These services are not permitted in a restrictive state like Mississippi.
The professional copayment amount should not be waived. If distinct professional and facility services were provided, the member will be charged for both the facility cost-share and the professional cost-share.
FEP considers physician assistants to be covered professional providers when acting within the scope of their license. If the Local Plan includes them in its Preferred provider network, they are considered primary care providers.
Yes, services billed by a Nursing School Administered Clinic are considered covered. They are categorized as outpatient "office" services of a nursing school.
Local Plan staff should refer to the FEP FRAUD, WASTE AND ABUSE STANDARDS GUIDANCE in Chapter 15 for screening guidelines to assist in detecting potentially fraudulent claims.
An "episode of care" includes all covered non-participating professional services a member receives during an emergency room visit, an associated inpatient hospital admission, or the member's first follow-up visit with the non-participating provider after hospital discharge.
The guidelines for potential balance relief apply to services from January 1, 2022, and forward.
In exception situations, the Plan should provide the member with a letter stating that an exception is being granted, contingent on Plan verification that the services are covered. Plans should be aware that exceptions may be granted only on a case-by-case basis.
Primary Care Providers are restricted to general practitioners, family practitioners, internists, obstetricians/gynecologists, and pediatricians.
For any questions about the administration of the NPA Balance Relief Provision, you should contact your Plan Operations Manager at the FEP Director's Office.




Expected Answer
Under the Basic Option, benefits are limited to 20 manipulation visits per calendar year.
No. Cupping, along with moxibustion and Tui Na, is considered a non-investigational/unconventional procedure and is not included as part of the acupuncture benefit.
For FEP Blue Focus members, there is a visit limit of 200 hours of Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) per person, per calendar year.
Yes, effective January 1, 2024, prior approval is required for diagnostic and/or managing a member's existing medical condition or for members requesting testing due to a high risk of disease.
No. The plan excludes benefits for "Research Costs," which are defined as costs for physician and nurse research time, analysis of results, and tests performed only for research purposes.
No. Furniture, such as ergonomic or adjustable chairs, is specifically listed as a non-covered DME item.
For adults age 22 and over, the hearing aid benefit is limited to $2,500 every 5 calendar years.
No. Benefits are not available for routine foot care, such as the cutting or removal of corns or calluses, unless the member has a diagnosed metabolic or peripheral vascular disease, like diabetes.
The Standard Option covers up to 50 home nursing care visits per calendar year. The Basic Option covers up to 25 visits per calendar year.
For FEP Blue Focus members, cognitive rehabilitation therapy is subject to its own annual visit limitation of 25 visits per calendar year, separate from other therapy limits.
You have 15 visits left. The Standard Option has a combined annual limit of 75 visits for physical, occupational, and speech therapy. You have used 60 visits so far (40 + 20).
No. FEP benefits are not available for LASIK, INTACS, radial keratotomy, or other refractive surgical services.
Test strips and lancets are available at no cost for Standard and Basic Option members, but only when obtained through the separate Diabetes Management Program, not through standard medical benefits.
The SBP pays up to a maximum of $625 per calendar year for a medically necessary speech-generating device for FEP Blue Focus members.
No. While benefits for one wig per lifetime are available under the Standard and Basic options, wigs are explicitly not available under the FEP Blue Focus plan.
No. The definition of telemedicine services explicitly excludes non-interactive telecommunication, such as email communications or asynchronous store-and-forward technologies.
Yes, there are generally no visit limitations for these therapies under FEP Blue Focus only; applied behavior analysis is an exception.
Yes, an example of a covered non-preventive immunization is when a member is traveling to an area known for a specific type of disease, such as yellow fever, and it is considered at high risk to contract the disease.
No. Even if prescribed, claims for medical foods purchased at a grocery store, "big-box" store, or department store will be denied. They must be obtained through a pharmacy or DME provider to be considered for coverage.
You are responsible for only one copayment. The guidelines state that if a Plan receives a claim for multiple diagnostic tests performed by the same provider on the same day, only one copayment should be applied. The higher of the two copayments will apply.



Expected Answer
The FEP Blue Focus plan has a benefit limitation of 200 hours of ABA therapy per person per calendar year.
When a physician bills for both an office visit and chemotherapy administration on the same day, benefits are available for both services. If it's a Preferred provider, the services would be paid in full less the applicable per-visit copayment.
Yes, the $10 visit copayment applies when the visit is billed by a professional provider. This benefit applies only when the first 10 visits per calendar year do not apply a deductible and/or coinsurance.
For the Standard Option and Basic Option plans, benefits are available for one wig per lifetime. The benefit is up to 100% of the cost, up to a maximum of $350.
No, Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) services related to and performed as part of an educational program or that are the responsibility of the educational system are not covered.
Yes, benefits are not available for the cost of an experimental or investigational drug. However, if the drug is provided free of charge, the Local Plan should determine if there is a charge for any related services, such as the administration of the drug, and may pay for those services.
Under the Basic Option, if a member receives physical and occupational therapy from a Preferred provider on the same day, only one copayment will be applied.
Benefits for routine foot care are only available when the member has a diagnosis of peripheral vascular, metabolic, or arteriosclerosis and Buerger’s disease.
When it is determined that the long-term rental of DME is more expensive than its purchase, the Local Plan should complete a cost analysis comparing rental costs with purchase costs, at the time the Plan is first notified.
Yes, in some cases, deluxe items may be medically necessary. For instance, a power-operated vehicle (POV) may be medically necessary for a member who is physically incapable of operating a standard manual wheelchair.
Home phototherapy for neonatal jaundice may be considered eligible for coverage when the therapy is medically necessary. Local Plans are expected to conduct a medical review of the clinical information for the specific member to determine whether use of the therapy is medically necessary as defined in the SBP brochures.
Yes, benefits for adults are limited to $2,500 per person per a five-year period. Members may be able to obtain a hearing aid before the five-year period has expired when certain criteria are met.
Medical benefits are available for genetic testing when it is performed for a member with signs and symptoms of a specific genetic disease, and the testing is medically necessary to manage a patient's existing medical condition or meet the SBP criteria for BRCA testing.
Yes, the wig does not have to be custom-made and does not have to be prescribed by a physician. Members may purchase a wig from any type of provider, including non-medical providers (e.g., beauty salons, commercial establishments) and individual sellers.
Yes, under FEP Blue Focus, covered acupuncture and speech therapy do not accumulate toward the visit limit for physical, occupational and speech therapy, but do accumulate toward the combined visit limit that applies to acupuncture and manipulative treatments.
Under all options, if a member receives physical therapy from one provider and occupational therapy from the same provider on the same day, the same type of therapy performed by more than one provider, or physical and occupational therapy filled by two physical therapists on the same day, visits are accumulated for each provider.
Claims for sleep studies should be reviewed for medical necessity using the medical necessity criteria for sleep studies found in the Service Benefit Plan (SBP) brochures. In conducting such reviews, Plans should keep in mind that sleep studies may be conducted to diagnose sleep apnea and/or BIPAP machine to treat sleep apnea.
No, services primarily for bathing, feeding, exercising, or moving the patient are not covered under the home nursing care benefit.
Yes, benefits may be provided for medically necessary FDA-approved home anti-coagulation monitoring devices. These devices are used to measure the level of a specific clotting factor in the blood.
Changing technology constantly results in new product lines and improvements to existing medical equipment. Local Plans should carefully review claims for deluxe features to make sure the equipment is more versatile or easier for the patient to use. When a patient chooses deluxe equipment, benefits should be provided for the contractually appropriate charge for the standard item.




Expected Answer
Yes. For Basic Option, preventive care benefits are available for services performed by Participating and Non-participating independent laboratories or radiologists.
If a Preferred provider performs both preventive and diagnostic services on the same day, the preventive service will be paid in full. The member will be responsible for paying the applicable cost-share for the diagnostic services.
No, a chest X-ray is not covered as a preventive service.
Preventive care benefits are limited to one per calendar year for each of the services listed under Covered Services. For instance, if a member receives an initial preventive CBC in January and receives a second preventive CBC in June, regular medical benefits will be provided for the second service.
No. For the Standard Option, services may be performed by any covered provider, regardless of network status. However, to receive the services at no member cost-share, the member must use a Preferred provider.
It depends. If pathology processes and/or a different provider performs the polyp removal on a different day during a routine colonoscopy, it is performed by a Preferred provider or facility, reprocess the claim and remove the cost-share.
Yes, preventive care benefits are available for low-dose lung CT screening for members potentially at increased risk for lung cancer. The benefit is limited to one screening per calendar year, for members age 50 to 80 who smoke or have a history of smoking.
Ultrasound screening for an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is eligible for Preventive Care benefits; limited to adults ages 65 to 75.
For Basic Option members, AAA screening performed by non-participating providers is subject to a 35% coinsurance after the calendar year deductible is met. The member is also responsible for the difference between the Plan allowance and the billed charge.
Preventive Care benefits are available for one annual genetic counseling evaluation for members whose family history is associated with an increased risk for harmful mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes.
No. Physical exams required for obtaining or continuing employment or insurance, attending schools or camps, or satisfying travel requirements are listed as noncovered services.
No, the Pregnancy Care Incentive Program is not available under FEP Blue Focus.
Under the Standard and Basic Option, the contract holder and spouse, upon completion of the BHA questionnaire, are each entitled to receive a $50 health account, for a variety of rewards from our partner vendors.
If a member leaves the Service Benefit Plan, any money remaining in the health account will be forfeited.
The Diabetes Management Incentive Program (DMIP) was discontinued on Jan. 1, 2024. The rest of this document pertains to DMIP benefits available prior to that date.
The program covers generic Bupropion ER, Varenicline (generic for Chantix), and brand-name Nicotrol inhalers and nasal spray.
Yes, OTC medications are available. However, there may be age restrictions, and a physician's prescription must be obtained at a Preferred retail pharmacy. Benefits are not available for OTC smoking and tobacco cessation medications outside of this incentive program.
Gardasil 9 is available in the United States as long as the first of the three Gardasil 9 injections in the series is administered within the FDA-approved age range. Preventive Care benefits are available for the entire series, regardless of when the second and third injections are administered.
The member may be responsible for the applicable office visit cost-share if the primary purpose of the visit was to treat an illness, the immunization will be paid in full up to Plan allowance.
Yes, the SBP provides Preventive Care benefits for additional laboratory tests for children who are internationally adopted. The additional screenings are recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) for this population.



Expected Answer
The Local Plan should contact the provider to verify the visit was for preventive care and that a preventive diagnosis code should have been used. The Plan may then use the preventive diagnosis code to process the claim.
Both services are considered part of the same single preventive EKG for the year. The member should have no cost-share for either claim when the services are performed by Preferred providers.
If a member leaves the Service Benefit Plan, any money remaining in the health account from the incentive program is forfeited.
Prior to January 1, 2024, the benefit for preventive BRCA testing for large genomic rearrangements was limited to one test of each type, per lifetime, per member. This benefit limit was eliminated on January 1, 2024.
No, the Pregnancy Care Incentive Program is not available under the FEP Blue Focus plan. It is only available to Standard and Basic Option members.
If a polyp is found and removed during a routine colonoscopy performed by a Preferred provider, the Plan should reprocess the claim to remove the member's cost-share.
Yes. As long as the first of the three Gardasil 9 injections is administered within the FDA-approved age range, Preventive Care benefits are available for the entire series.
The member must present a written prescription from a physician for both prescription and OTC products, and the prescription must be filled by a pharmacist at a Preferred retail pharmacy.
The Plan pays 100% of the Plan allowance for the service. The member is responsible for any difference between the Plan allowance and the provider's billed charge.
No. Physical exams required for obtaining or continuing employment, attending schools or camps, or satisfying travel requirements are not covered as a preventive benefit.
No. For a valid service associated with the first cancer screening of the year, benefits are at the Preventive level. Any subsequent services performed on a different date would be considered regular medical or surgical benefits.
The Routine Annual Physical Incentive Program rewards FEP Blue Focus members with a $150 Blue Wellness card, which can be used for products and services from an electronic shopping mall.
Members who inquire about benefits for prophylactic surgical procedures should be encouraged to have their provider submit an Advance Benefit Determination Request prior to the services being performed.
No. The Local Plan should not pay benefits when the member is not legally obligated to pay for the services or when the absence of health insurance coverage is a prerequisite for receiving the service.
The member is responsible for 35% coinsurance after the calendar year deductible is met, and they are also responsible for the difference between the Plan allowance and the billed charge.
Under the Standard Option, the visit for each provider counts toward the annual limit. The member is charged one copayment for each provider.
They should be informed that the Diabetes Management Incentive Program (DMIP) was discontinued on January 1, 2024, and is no longer available.
No. The policy notes that the HPV vaccine Cervarix, which is used in some countries, is not available in the United States.
Members can receive these medications at no cost-share when they meet the criteria for the Associated Drug Tier as determined by the Prescription Drug Program. Otherwise, they are responsible for the appropriate cost-share.
Effective January 1, 2024, the contract holder and spouse are each entitled to a $50 health account credit, for a total of $100. This is accessed via a debit card sent to the member.




Expected Answer
No. Routine nursery care of the newborn is covered by the mother's stay and billed to the facility. However, Maternity Care benefits are not available for care provided to the newborn because the newborn is not a covered family member under the surrogate's coverage.
No. Unless otherwise required by State Practice Acts, a CNM does not require the physical presence of a physician when patient care is given.
Benefits for a standby physician (usually a pediatrician or neonatologist) are available if they are needed to receive a newborn during a medically necessary or cesarean delivery, or operating room to provide standby services. The benefits are paid under Preventive Care benefits.
Ultrasonography may be included in the "global fee." It is an integral part of those procedures and, as indicated by the CPT coding methodology, should be billed using the global fee methodology. The charge for the ultrasound is included in the total charge for the covered procedure.
Yes, to be eligible for anesthesia services (including acupuncture), the attending physician or other provider must request the services. The acupuncture must be provided by either a physician or a certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA) acting within the scope of their license.
Maternity care benefits are available for up to 8 mental health visits per calendar year to treat depression associated with pregnancy, postpartum depression, or both, when the member uses a Preferred provider.
No. The fulfillment vendor is the only covered provider for a member's access to breast pump kits and milk storage bags. Members have no cost-share for these services when dispensed by the vendor.
No. The vendor will not provide any other types of breastfeeding equipment or supplies. Members who require alternate or additional equipment or supplies will need to purchase them directly from another vendor at their own expense.
Benefits are not available for supplies purchased from medical suppliers or retail vendors. Specifically, other types of storage bags, bottles (or clothing, e.g., nursing bras), baby bottles, or items for personal comfort or convenience are not covered.
Local Plans are not permitted to send the provider a remittance that does not mirror the information transmitted electronically. The Plan must return the complete claim to the facility for the separation of the newborn's claim. Only in addition, if the remittance must reflect the correct processing, the Plan does not apply a separate copayment to the newborn's claim.
A newborn becomes a patient in their own right when the hospital admission begins for a covered newborn who requires care outside of routine newborn care for situations such as being admitted to the NICU, born prematurely (prior to 38 weeks), or diagnosed with a congenital abnormality requiring immediate and intensive treatment.
Nursery revenue code 0172 (Level II) corresponds to the "Sick newborn Inpatient Hospital" SBP benefit category.
For FEP Blue Focus members, the cost-share is included in the Maternity - Facility benefit payment of $1,500 copayment per pregnancy (no deductible).
Yes, covered services include care provided in the member's home and related conditions resulting in childbirth or spontaneous or missed abortion (miscarriage), and those services are listed in the following paragraph. A CNM is educated in both nursing and midwifery and is certified according to the requirements of the American College of Nurse-Midwives.
It depends on the billing practice. When Plans use a global fee methodology for maternity care, they may consider including the administration of Rho-D Immune Globulin as part of the global maternity fee.
The FEP Director's Office reviewed the range of potential circumstances under which no recent maternity claims history would exist for members who are nursing. Given those circumstances, the FEP claims processing system does not attempt to match claims history data with requests for breastfeeding equipment or supplies to identify members who have recently given birth.
The vendor will provide a claim record with a special override code identifying what item was dispensed. For an electric breast pump, the override is FXM.
No, a Doula, birth companion, and similar supporter are non-covered services under the Maternity Care benefit.
While not all instances of tocolytic therapy are appropriate for Case Management, Local Plan Case Managers should be notified of member inquiries and claims regarding tocolytic therapy so that the member may be screened for case management services.
Circumcision that is billed for by the facility as part of the mother's inpatient facility claim should be paid as part of the mother's claim. However, Local Plans should educate their professional providers to bill the charge for circumcision separately from the delivery charge to facilitate payment of a separate claim for the circumcision as an expense of the newborn.
If the infant becomes a patient in their own right, the physician or hospital must contact the Local Plan for precertification and submit separate billing for the newborn's charges (per admission cost-share applies). Separate charges for services are a covered family member, one of the parents must have been enrolled under a Self and Family or Self Plus One policy.
No. Maternity care for women/members not enrolled in the SBP, such as maternity care for a surrogate or gestational carrier when the surrogate is not a member of the Plan, are non-covered services.
Under Basic Option, maternity care or non-preferred diagnostic tests performed in the outpatient department of a Preferred or Non-preferred hospital are provided in full. This means that under Basic Option, any copay is waived, and the member has no liability for the tests.
The postpartum period is generally the six weeks immediately following delivery of the newborn. Postnatal care includes hospital care, professional provider visits, and routine follow-up care.
Yes, under Standard Option, outpatient maternity care services are available under the Outpatient Hospital or Ambulatory Surgical Center benefit. Services provided at a Preferred facility are paid in full; they are not subject to deductibles, copayments or coinsurance amounts.
No, a member does not need a physician's prescription to receive a breast pump kit or milk storage bags.
Breast pump kits may not be exchanged. The member should receive a breast pump kit within 14 days of the order date.
Claims for circumcision must be accompanied by a completed claim form and an itemized bill from the provider/supplier reflecting the purchase of a wig. The patient's name, the date of purchase, and the name and address of the provider or supplier, the date of charge for the wig must also be included.
No. Maternity Care benefits are not provided for oral tocolytic agents. Oral tocolytic agents are prescription drugs covered under the Prescription Drug Benefit. See Section 5(f) of the SBP brochures for information about prescription drug benefits.
Maternity Care benefits are provided for low-dose aspirin (81 mg per day) for pregnant women members at risk for preeclampsia. Benefits are available only when the member uses a Preferred retail pharmacy and presents a written prescription from her physician.
If the newborn stays in the hospital after the mother has been discharged, then the physician or hospital must contact the Local Plan for precertification of additional inpatient days for the newborn. The hospital admission of the newborn in their own right is subject to the applicable per admission copayment.
For FEP Blue Focus, benefits for covered outpatient maternity care are available under the Maternity - Facility benefit. The cost-share is included in the Preferred facilities $1,500 copayment per pregnancy (no deductible).
Yes, covered services include childbirth or spontaneous or missed abortion (miscarriage), and those services listed in the following paragraph.
Eligible Standard Option and Basic Option members who are age 18 or older and do not have an international address may also place orders via the MyBlue website. On the MyBlue homepage, the member should scroll down to the Wellness Resources, select "Pregnancy Care Incentive Program," scroll down to "Other Benefits & Resources," and click on "Order Now."
If a provider's claim for a newborn does not reflect a remittance sent to them for the newborn alone, the Plan must not apply a separate copayment to the newborn's claim. Concurrently, the Local Plan should submit a separate claim for the newborn for claims processing, one for the mother and one for the newborn.




Expected Answer
Yes. The removal of impacted teeth is a covered oral and maxillofacial surgical service.
Outpatient oral or maxillofacial surgery needed to correct accidental injuries of the jaws, cheeks, lips, tongue, and roof and floor of the mouth is covered at 100% of the Plan's allowance under Standard Option when the services are performed within 72 hours of the accident.
No, prior approval is not required for oral or maxillofacial surgery needed to correct accidental injuries of the jaws, cheeks, lips, tongue, and roof and floor of the mouth, if performed within 72 hours of the accident.
Yes, nipple-areola complex tattooing is covered for post-mastectomy patients either as an alternative to nipple reconstruction or as an adjunct to surgical nipple reconstruction.
Yes, there are instances when dental extractions are medically necessary as a result of treatment for cancer (i.e., prior to or during radiation or chemotherapy treatment) to excise a malignant tumor, or medically necessary due to damaged sustained from nonsurgical cancer treatment, such as prolonged medically necessary use of certain oral medications.
The Service Benefit Plan (SBP) provides benefits for the correction of congenital anomalies that existed at or from birth and represent significant deviations from the common form or norm.
Effective Jan. 1, 2024, prior approval is not required for outpatient surgical correction of congenital anomalies. The requirement applies to both the physician and the facility services (if any) provided by Preferred, Participating/Member, and Non-participating/Non-member providers.
Yes, participation in a medically supervised weight loss program, including nutritional counseling, for at least three months prior to the date of surgery is a pre-surgical requirement. Note: Benefits are not available for commercial weight loss programs.
A psychological clearance of the member's ability to understand and adhere to the pre- and post-operative program, based on a psychological assessment performed by a licensed professional mental health practitioner, is required.
Yes, but there must be no evidence of substance use disorder for one year prior to surgery.
The member must have six months of continuous hormone therapy appropriate to the individual's gender identity (unless medically contraindicated for mastectomy).
A member must have one letter from a qualified mental health care professional that includes a diagnosis of gender dysphoria and documentation that other possible causes of gender incongruence have been excluded.
Under Basic Option, members pay a separate copayment for services of a co-surgeon.
No, hypnosis provided as a means of anesthesia is not covered by the SBP.
Anesthesia services are eligible for coverage as long as the services meet all of the following criteria: the services were requested by the attending physician, the entire procedure and provided all the usual services except for the actual administration of the anesthetic agent, and the anesthesia was medically necessary for the patient’s condition.
No, a pre-anesthesia evaluation is considered an integral part of the anesthesia service, and these services are not in the charge for the anesthesia service.
Yes, the surgical services listed in the "Table of Surgical Procedures Not Subject to Surgical Copayment Under Basic Option" are paid at 100% of the Plan's Preferred Provider Allowance (PPA) after the applicable primary care provider (PCP) or specialist office visit copay is applied.
Standard Option and Basic Option: For all surgeries listed above, enhanced benefits for covered inpatient facility services are available when the surgery is performed in a facility designated as a Blue Distinction Center for Comprehensive Bariatric Surgery.
Yes, see BLUE DISTINCTION CENTERS FOR TRANSPLANTS for the benefits provided for organ transplants performed in Blue Distinction Centers for Transplants, including the enhanced benefits provided for transplants performed in Blue Distinction Centers.
The SBP provides benefits for reconstructive services only when all of the following requirements are met: 1. the services provided meet the definition of reconstructive surgery as stated above, 2. the services are medically necessary, and 3. the services are not otherwise specifically listed as noncovered or excluded.




Expected Answer
If the Plan allowance for the surgical procedure is less than the medical service (office visit) copayment, the member's liability is capped at the surgical allowance. The remaining balance of the copayment is then used to offset the member's liability for other services.
The copayment amount for the medical service is $30 for a Primary Care Provider and $40 for a specialist.
Pre- and post-operative care benefits should not be provided for on the basis of the allowance for the surgical procedure. In such cases, the Plan should deny benefits for the pre- and/or post-operative care.
Benefits may be provided when multiple or bilateral surgical procedures are performed during the same operative session and are medically necessary on the basis of the Allowable Charge that is determined by the Local Plan. The Plan pays multiple and bilateral surgeries on the basis of a reduced allowance for the non-primary procedures.
The characteristics of secondary procedures may include, but are not limited to, the following: surgical management of multiple traumas is needed, a different route of access is required, they involve a major body system that is different than that of the primary procedure, and they are required as the result of pathology that differs from the primary procedure.
After 72 hours, benefits for such services are provided at regular Surgical and Anesthesia Services and Other Healthcare Professionals benefit levels.
Pertinent documentation must be obtained and kept to substantiate the basis for the Local Plan's decision. Pertinent documentation includes an appropriate diagnosis, medical records, and treatment plans. Claims for extraction of teeth prior to chemotherapy or other medication review of medical necessity by Plan medical personnel.
Any decision to deny benefits on the basis that the surgery does not constitute reconstructive surgery must be based on the coverage criteria stated in the applicable SBP brochure. For instance, if the Local Plan determines that a surgery is cosmetic (and not reconstructive), the Plan's denial letter must utilize the definition of cosmetic surgery as stated in the brochure.
The Local Plan determines whether the covered procedure requires inpatient care, based on the medical necessity of inpatient care.
Yes, benefits are available for the reversal of covered bariatric (i.e., obesity-related) procedures when the reversal is medically necessary as defined in the SBP brochures.
When a member receives a BDC-eligible procedure at any such hospital, the member should always receive the benefit of the enhanced BDC payment level. A listing of BDC-eligible procedures at BDC-designated hospitals is available at https://www.bcbs.com/about-us/programs-initiatives/blue-distinction-specialty-care.
Benefits are provided for the removal of breast implants when a medical condition, such as leaking, is present. This policy includes implants as a result of mastectomy, which are not covered by FEP. Local Plans are expected to use clinical judgment in their determination of whether the removal was a result of a medical condition.
When a member has a positive BRCA test result, they may be counseled about options for managing future cancer risk. Options for managing risk include increased screening, chemoprevention, and/or prophylactic surgery.
For these reasons, separate benefits for pre-anesthesia evaluations are generally not available. However, Local Plans should make their own decisions about whether to approve separate benefits for pre-anesthesia evaluation.
For those occasional instances when medically appropriate general anesthesia is provided in conjunction with non-surgical testing or examinations, Local Plans need to process the anesthesia claim to allow the payment of the anesthesia charge.
The surgical services listed below are paid at 100% of the Plan's Preferred Allowance after the applicable primary care provider (PCP) or specialist office visit copayment is applied.
Under Basic Option, if a Preferred provider bills for a medical service that is subject to a per-visit copayment (e.g., office visit, diagnostic test, treatment therapy) in addition to a surgical procedure that is subject to the surgical copayment, the member is responsible for paying only the surgical copayment.
Incidental surgical procedures are those performed at the same time that the primary surgical procedure is done and require few additional physical resources. A clinical procedure integral to the completion of the primary procedure is also considered an incidental procedure.
All denials for gender-affirming surgery require administrative review via the FEP Hub, regardless of the reason for denial. This process ensures compliance with FEP guidelines before issuing denials to members.
A facility may have a policy or regulation requiring the presence of an assistant surgeon during surgery in certain instances. While this is generally done to ensure quality of care, this type of policy or regulation should not be the sole influence on the provision of Service Benefit Plan (SBP) benefits.


















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































